NARRATOR:
FROM THE WINDOW OF HIS HOME
IN EXILE
ON THE CHANNEL ISLANDS,
VICTOR HUGO COULD SEE
THE COAST OF HIS NATIVE FRANCE.
HERE, ON THE WINDSWEPT
ISLE OF GUERNSEY,
HUGO WOULD RISE
AT 6:00 EVERY MORNING
AND SIT DOWN TO WORK.
IT WAS THE DAILY ROUTINE OF
A PRODIGIOUSLY PROLIFIC WRITER
WHO NOT ONLY FOUND
SUCCESS IN POETRY,
NOVELS, AND ON THE STAGE,
BUT ALSO HELPED DEFINE
A LITERARY TRADITION
AND CHANGE THE POLITICAL
FACE OF HIS COUNTRY.
THROUGHOUT HIS CAREER
AS A WRITER,
HE NEVER TOOK
HIS EYE OFF OF FRANCE.
THE LIFE OF VICTOR HUGO,
ONE OF THE GIANTS
OF FRENCH LITERATURE,
IS A STUDY IN CONTRASTS.
HE WAS BORN
INTO HUMBLE CIRCUMSTANCES
AND YET DURING HIS YOUTH,
HE WAS A STAUNCH MONARCHIST.
IN HIS ADULT LIFE HE BECAME
A POLITICAL LIBERAL
AND A SUPPORTER
OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC,
BUT ALSO ACCEPTED
THE TITLE OF PEER OF FRANCE
FROM KING LOUIS PHILLIPE.
HE LIVED IN EXILE
FOR NEARLY 20 YEARS
BECAUSE OF HIS OPPOSITION
TO NAPOLEON III,
WHOSE NOMINATION TO
THE PRESIDENCY OF THE REPUBLIC
HE HAD ONCE SUPPORTED.
LIKE THE MAN HIMSELF,
HUGO'S WORKS ARE A DIZZYING
KALEIDOSCOPE OF CONTRASTS.
[THEME MUSIC PLAYING]
VICTOR-MARIE HUGO WAS BORN
ON FEBRUARY 26TH, 1802,
IN BESANçON,
IN THE SOUTHEAST OF FRANCE.
HIS MOTHER, SOPHIE TRéBUCHET,
WAS A MONARCHIST
AND A FERVENT CATHOLIC,
VALUES WHICH SHE INSTILLED
IN HER THREE SONS.
HIS FATHER,
JOSEPH-LéOPOLD-SIGISBERT HUGO,
WAS A GENERAL OF THE FRENCH
EMPIRE WHO WAS ALSO A LIBERAL
AND AN ENTHUSIASTIC
REPUBLICAN.
THE FAMILY MOVED CONSTANTLY,
AS YOUNG VICTOR'S FATHER
PURSUED HIS MILITARY CAREER.
HUGO ALSO WITNESSED
SEVERAL PUBLIC EXECUTIONS
DURING HIS BOYHOOD,
EVENTS HE FOUND SO TRAUMATIC
THAT WERE TO REMAIN INDELIBLY
IMPRINTED UPON HIS PSYCHE.
IN 1812, MADAME HUGO
SEPARATED FROM HER HUSBAND
AND MOVED WITH HER SONS TO
THE CONVENT OF FEUILLANTINES,
WHERE VICTOR LIVED FOR
THE REST OF HIS BOYHOOD YEARS.
HE AND HIS BROTHERS PLAYED
IN THE CONVENT'S GARDEN.
AND THIS IDYLLIC SETTING
UNDOUBTEDLY INFORMED
HIS LOVE OF NATURE
AND HIS POETIC IMAGINATION.
"THE GARDEN WAS LARGE, DEEP,
"MYSTERIOUS, CLOSED IN BY
HIGH CURIOUS LOOKING WALLS,
"SOWN WITH FLOWERS
OPENING LIKE EYELIDS,
"AND RUBY-RED INSECTS
RUNNING ALONG THE STONES.
"IT WAS FULL OF BUZZINGS
AND CONFUSED VOICES;
"IN THE MIDDLE, ALMOST A FIELD,
"AT ITS HEART,
ALMOST A FOREST."
HUGO FELT THE CALL
OF A LIFE OF LETTERS EARLY.
AT THE AGE OF 14, HE WROTE:
"I WANT TO BE
CHATEAUBRIAND OR NOTHING."
HE ATTENDED THE LYCéE
LOUIS-LE GRAND IN PARIS,
AND IN EARLY ADOLESCENCE
BEGAN WRITING VERSE TRAGEDIES
POETRY, AND TRANSLATING
VIRGIL.
"AT TIMES,
WHEN EVERYTHING SLEEPS,
"I SIT AND EXALT
OUR BROWS ABLAZE
"UNDER THE VAST
AND STARRY VAULT;
"I LISTEN TO SEE IF SOME NOISE
FALLS FROM THE HEIGHTS;
"AND THE HOUR VAINLY
STRIKES ME WITH ITS WING
"WHEN I CONTEMPLATE,
MOVED BY THIS ETERNAL THING
"THAT THE SHINING HEAVENS
GIVE TO THE WORLD AT NIGHT."
AT THE AGE OF 17,
VICTOR HUGO FELL MADLY IN LOVE
WITH HIS CHILDHOOD FRIEND,
ADéLE FOUCHER.
HIS MOTHER OPPOSED
THE UNION, HOWEVER,
AND OVER THE NEXT THREE YEARS
ADéLE AND VICTOR
MET FURTIVELY AND EXCHANGED
OVER 150 LETTERS.
VICTOR DEVOTED HIMSELF
TO HIS LITERARY WORK
WITH EQUAL PASSION.
TOGETHER WITH HIS BROTHERS
HE FOUNDED A JOURNAL,
THE CONSERVATEUR LITTéRAIRE,
WHICH BECAME
A SEMINAL PUBLICATION
OF FRENCH ROMANTICISM.
HE ALSO WON A NUMBER
OF AWARDS FOR HIS POETRY,
INCLUDING TWO "MENTIONS"
FROM THE ACADéMIE FRANçAISE.
ON JUNE 27TH, 1821
HIS MOTHER DIED.
WITHOUT HER OBJECTIONS
TO HOLD HIM BACK,
VICTOR WAS FREE AT LAST
TO MARRY ADéLE FOUCHER.
THE SAME YEAR
THAT HE AND ADéLE MARRIED,
HIS LITERARY CAREER TOOK OFF.
ON JUNE 8TH, 1822,
HE PUBLISHED
HIS FIRST COMPILATION,
ODES AND VARIOUS POEMS,
WHICH EARNED A ROYAL PENSION
FROM LOUIS XVIII.
HIS APARTMENT
ON THE RUE DE CHAMPS
BECAME A HOTBED
OF THE ROMANTIC MOVEMENT.
ROMANTICISM, WHICH SPREAD
THROUGH EUROPE IN THE 1820s,
REJECTED THE DOGMATIC FORMULAS
OF LATE 18TH-CENTURY
NEOCLASSICISM.
THE ROMANTICS PRIZED
IMAGINATION OVER REASON,
EMOTION OVER LOGIC,
INTUITION OVER SCIENCE,
AND NATURE OVER ARTIFICE.
IN 1827,
HUGO PUBLISHED "CROMWELL,"
A POETIC DRAMA
THAT HE HOPED WOULD TAKE
THE STAGE BY STORM
FOR THE GLORY OF ROMANTICISM.
IN HIS FOREWORD TO THE PLAY,
HE CALLED
FOR A LIBERATED THEATRE,
FREE FROM THE RESTRICTIONS
OF CLASSICISM.
THIS TEXT WAS, IN EFFECT,
THE FIRST PAMPHLET
OF FRENCH ROMANTICISM.
IN 1830,
HE REALIZED HIS DREAM
OF CONQUERING
THE FRENCH COMEDY,
UNTIL THEN THE BASTION
OF THE CLASSICISTS,
WITH HIS PLAY, HERNANI.
ON OPENING NIGHT,
YOUNG HUGO PARTISANS
AND ANTAGONISTIC CLASSICISTS
PACKED THE THEATRE
AND THE PLAY
BECAME A BOISTEROUS,
AND SOMETIMES VIOLENT
REFERENDUM ON ROMANTICISM.
A LITERARY REVOLUTION WAS BORN,
AND POLITICAL CHANGE
WAS NOT FAR BEHIND.
AT THE AGE OF 28,
VICTOR HUGO'S FAME IS SECURED.
HE HAS BECOME
ONE OF THE MAIN SPOKESMEN
OF THE YOUNG ROMANTIC GUARD.
ALONG WITH HIS
THEATRICAL SUCCESSES,
HUGO ALSO EXCELLED
IN POETRY AND PROSE.
IN 1829, HE PUBLISHED
"THE LAST DAY
OF A CONDEMNED MAN,"
A NOVEL THAT ADVOCATES
FOR THE ELIMINATION
OF THE DEATH PENALTY,
AND "ORIENTAL POEMS,"
WHICH TAPS INTO THE ERA'S
FASCINATION WITH THE FAR EAST.
"THE MOON WAS CALM,
AND FLECKED THE OCEAN STREAMS.
"THE CASEMENT OPENS
FREELY TO THE BREEZE;
"WHILE THE SULTANA WATCHES,
"BREAKING SEAS
WEAVE THE BLACK ISLES
"BELOW WITH SILVER SEAMS."
HUGO WAS NOT YET 30,
AS HE ENTERED ONE OF THE MOST
PRODUCTIVE PERIODS IN HIS LIFE.
FROM 1830 TO 1843,
HE DEVOTED HIMSELF
TO UNINTERRUPTED
LITERARY CREATION.
HIS FAMILY ALSO GREW,
AS HE AND ADéLE
WELCOMED THE BIRTH
OF THEIR FOURTH DAUGHTER.
THEIR MARRIAGE,
HOWEVER, WAS WEAKENED
BY ADéLE'S
ROMANTIC ENTANGLEMENT
WITH THE WRITER
AND CRITIC, SAINTE-BEUVE.
VICTOR FOUND CONSOLATION
IN JULIETTE DROUET,
ONE OF THE ACTRESSES IN
HIS PLAY, "LUCREZIA BORGIA."
THIS IS THE BEGINNING
OF A RELATIONSHIP WHICH,
THROUGH NUMEROUS RUPTURES
AND RECONCILIATIONS,
WOULD LAST A LIFETIME.
DESPITE THESE
AND OTHER INFIDELITIES,
VICTOR AND ADéLE REMAINED
MARRIED TO EACH OTHER
THROUGHOUT THEIR LIVES.
DESPITE HIS ENORMOUS
POPULAR SUCCESS,
VICTOR STILL LONGED
FOR OFFICIAL RECOGNITION.
IN 1841, AFTER MANY
UNSUCCESSFUL ATTEMPTS,
HE ACHIEVED HIS DREAM
OF BEING ELECTED
TO THE ACADéMIE FRANçAISE.
HE HAD FINALLY REACHED
THE PINNACLE OF HIS CAREER,
BUT MISFORTUNE WAS
JUST AROUND THE CORNER.
IN MARCH 1843,
HIS EPIC DRAMA
"THE BURGRAVES"
WAS BOOED AT ITS
OPENING NIGHT PERFORMANCE.
HUGO QUIT THE WORLD
OF THEATRE IN FRUSTRATION.
SOME MONTHS LATER, HIS BELOVED
19 YEAR-OLD DAUGHTER,
LéOPOLDINE,
DROWNED IN THE SEINE.
HUGO WAS DEVASTATED,
AND WOULD NOT VISIT HER GRAVE
UNTIL THREE YEARS LATER.
"SINCE, FROM MY SOUL
ALL HOPE HAS PASSED AWAY...
"SINCE, IN THIS MONTH
OF FRAGRANCE AND THE ROSE,
"MY CHILD! I WISH TO SHARE
THY DARK REPOSE;
"SINCE, DEAD MY HEART,
TOO LONG IN LIFE I STAY."
AT A TURNING POINT IN HIS LIFE,
HUGO DECIDED TO EXPLORE
HIS POLITICAL AMBITIONS.
HE ABANDONED THE MONARCHISM
OF HIS EARLY YOUTH
AND SUPPORTED LOUIS PHILIP'S
CONSTITUTIONAL MONARCHY.
IN 1845,
THE KING REWARDED HUGO
BY NAMING HIM
A PEER OF FRANCE.
IN 1848,
THE MONARCHY COLLAPSED
UNDER THE WEIGHT
OF A POPULAR REVOLT.
HUGO COMMITTED HIMSELF
TO A POLITICAL STRUGGLE
THAT WOULD
EVENTUALLY TRANSFORM HIM
INTO A RESOUNDING VOICE
OF THE POOR AND THE OPPRESSED.
HE WAS ELECTED
TO THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY,
WHERE HE SUPPORTED
FREE EDUCATION,
UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE FOR MEN,
AND OTHER
DEMOCRATIZING MEASURES.
WHEN LOUIS NAPOLEON,
NAPOLEON BONAPARTE'S NEPHEW,
CAME ON THE POLITICAL SCENE,
HE PRESENTED HIMSELF
AS A LIBERAL SOCIAL REFORMIST,
AN EXPERIENCED MILITARY MAN
AND A STRONG PROMOTER
OF AGRICULTURAL
AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT.
HUGO SUPPORTED
HIS CANDIDACY FOR PRESIDENT
OF THE NEW FRENCH REPUBLIC.
LOUIS NAPOLEON WON BY
AN OVERWHELMING MAJORITY.
HOWEVER, IN 1851,
HE STAGED A COUP D'ETAT
AND ABOLISHED THE REPUBLIC.
HUGO TRIED IN VAIN TO RALLY
THE WORKERS OF PARIS
AGAINST NAPOLEON.
ENCOURAGED BY HIS
BROAD POPULAR SUPPORT,
LOUIS NAPOLEON TRANSFORMED
THE SECOND REPUBLIC
INTO THE SECOND EMPIRE,
AND HIMSELF INTO NAPOLEON III.
HIS AUTHORITARIAN REGIME
WOULD RULE FRANCE
FOR THE FOLLOWING TWO DECADES.
HUGO FLED TO BRUSSELS,
WHERE HE WROTE AND PUBLISHED
A FEROCIOUS SATIRE ENTITLED,
"NAPOLEON THE LITTLE."
THE PUBLICATION OF THIS TEXT
FORCED HIM TO LEAVE BELGIUM,
A SMALL COUNTRY THAT
WAS UNDERSTANDIBLY ANXIOUS
ABOUT NAPOLEON III'S
IMPERIALIST INTENTIONS.
HUGO FLED AGAIN, THIS TIME
TO THE UNITED KINGDOM.
IN AUGUST 1852,
HE SETTLED WITH HIS FAMILY
ON THE ISLE OF JERSEY.
WHILE LIVING ON JERSEY,
HUGO GATHERED SUPPORTERS
FOR HIS REPUBLICAN VIEWS,
WHICH LED
THE ISLE'S AUTHORITIES
TO EXPEL HIM
THREE YEARS LATER.
HE RELOCATED TO THE
NEIGHBORING ISLE OF GUERNSEY,
WHERE HE LIVED
FOR THE NEXT 15 YEARS.
DURING HIS EXILE,
VICTOR HUGO THREW HIMSELF
INTO PHILOSOPHICAL
AND LYRICAL POETRY.
FAR FROM HIS HIGH-PROFILE
PUBLIC LIFE IN PARIS,
HE COULD NOW
DEVOTE HIMSELF EXCLUSIVELY
TO HIS VOCATION AS A WRITER.
HE WROTE "CONTEMPLATIONS,"
CONSIDERED HIS
LYRICAL MASTERPIECE,
AND "PUNISHMENTS," A COLLECTION
OF POEMS THAT DENOUNCED
THE ABUSES
OF THE NAPOLEONIC EMPIRE.
HIS IS AMONG
THE MOST VARIED
AND POWERFUL POETRY
OF THE 19TH CENTURY.
IN 1859, NAPOLEON III GRANTED
AMNESTY TO POLITICAL EXILES.
HUGO COULD HAVE RETURNED
TO FRANCE, BUT HE REFUSED.
HE DECLARED, "I SHALL RETURN
WHEN FREEDOM RETURNS."
ON AUGUST 27TH, 1858,
HIS WIFE ADéLE
DIED IN BRUSSELS.
VICTOR HUGO MARCHED
WITH THE FUNERAL PROCESSION
UP TO THE BORDER
WITH FRANCE
AND THEN RETURNED TO GUERNSEY
ALONE, WHERE THE EVER FAITHFUL
JULIETTE DROUET
WAS WAITING FOR HIM.
ADéLE WAS BURIED IN FRANCE
NEXT TO HER DAUGHTER
LéOPOLDINE.
IN 1862 HUGO WROTE
"LES MISERABLES,"
A NOVEL WITH A STRONG
SOCIAL AGENDA,
CONDEMNING THE EVERYDAY MISERY
OF THE COMMON FOLK IN FRANCE.
"IN PRUNING SEASONS
HE EARNED 18 SOUS A DAY,
"THEN HE HIRED OUT
AS A HAY-MAKER,
"AS LABORER, AS NEAT-HERD
ON A FARM, AS A DRUDGE.
"HE DID WHATEVER HE COULD.
"HIS SISTER WORKED ALSO,
BUT WHAT COULD SHE DO
"WITH SEVEN LITTLE CHILDREN?
"IT WAS A SAD GROUP
ENVELOPED IN MISERY,
"WHICH WAS BEING
GRADUALLY ANNIHILATED.
"A VERY HARD WINTER CAME.
JEAN HAD NO WORK.
"THE FAMILY HAD NO BREAD.
"NO BREAD LITERALLY.
"SEVEN CHILDREN!"
HIS 20 YEARS IN EXILE
WOULD PROVE TO BE
VICTOR HUGO'S
MOST FRUITFUL PERIOD.
HE SAID, "MY PROSCRIPTION
IS GOOD AND I THANK FATE."
"GO TO THE WOODS!
GO TO THE BEACH!
"COMPOSE YOUR CANTOS INSPIRED
BY THE SONG OF THE FOLIAGE
"AND THE HYMN
OF THE AZURE WAVES!
"GOD AWAITS YOU IN SOLITUDES;
"GOD IS NOT IN THE MULTITUDES;
"MAN IS PETTY,
UNGRATEFUL AND VAIN.
"IN THE FIELDS EVERYTHING
VIBRATES AND SIGHS.
"NATURE IS THE GREAT LYRE,
"THE POET IS THE DIVINE BOW."
AFTER A PERIOD OF UPHEAVAL,
NAPOLEON III'S
EMPIRE COLLAPSED,
AND ON SEPTEMBER 4TH, 1870,
THE THIRD REPUBLIC
WAS PROCLAIMED.
THE NEXT DAY, VICTOR HUGO
BEGAN HIS JOURNEY HOME.
HAVING BEEN SECLUDED
IN THE CHANNEL ISLANDS,
IN SIGHT OF, BUT OUT OF TOUCH
WITH HIS COUNTRY,
HE WAS UNAWARE OF HOW IMMENSELY
POPULAR HE HAD BECOME.
YET AS HE TRAVELED BACK HOME,
CHEERING THRONGS AWAITED HIM
AT EACH TRAIN STATION.
WHEN HE REACHED PARIS, HE WAS
GRANTED A HERO'S WELCOME.
HE IS THE TOAST OF THE TOWN,
ATTENDED ON BY
THE MOST PROMINENT FIGURES
IN POLITICS, LITERATURE,
AND THE ARTS.
HIS VERSES
WERE RECITED EVERYWHERE.
DESPITE HIS TRIUMPHANT RETURN,
HUGO DECLARED THIS
THE "ANNéE TERRIBLE,"
THE HORRIBLE YEAR.
FRANCE SUFFERED
A HUMILIATING DEFEAT
AT THE HANDS
OF THE PRUSSIAN ARMY,
AND PARISIANS ENDURED
A CRUEL SIEGE.
IN THE WAKE OF THE SIEGE,
PARIS EXPLODED IN VIOLENCE
AS REVOLUTIONARIES PROCLAIMED
THE BIRTH OF THE PARIS COMMUNE.
HUGO SHARED THEIR IDEAS
BUT CONDEMNED THEIR TACTICS.
THIS COMPLICATED DYNAMIC
INSPIRED
THE POEMS OF
"THE TERRIBLE YEAR."
ON MARCH 13TH, 1871,
HUGO'S SON CHARLES DIED.
HUGO TRAVELED
TO BRUSSELS TO TAKE CHARGE
OF HIS DAUGHTER-IN-LAW
AND TWO GRANDCHILDREN.
FROM BELGIUM, HE OFFERED ASYLUM
TO SUPPORTERS OF THE COMMUNE.
KING LEOPOLD II OF BELGIUM
DID NOT WANT TO STIR UP
BAD FEELINGS WITH
THE FRENCH GOVERNMENT
AND SIGNED A DECREE EXPELLING
HUGO FROM THE COUNTRY.
THE FOLLOWING MORNING, VICTOR
HUGO LEFT BELGIUM FOREVER.
IN FRANCE THE VIOLENCE
CONTINUED UNABATED.
HUGO WAS ALMOST 70 YEARS-OLD,
AND HE WAS TIRED.
AFTER A BRIEF STAY IN PARIS,
HE RETURNED TO HIS HOME IN
EXILE, ON THE ISLE OF GUERNSEY.
GRADUALLY, HE WITHDREW
FROM POLITICS.
HE CONTINUED WRITING, BUT
THE PACE WAS NEVER THE SAME.
TRAGEDY FOLLOWED HIM
RELENTLESSLY.
IN 1872, HIS DAUGHTER ADéLE
WAS COMMITTED
TO A PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITAL.
IN 1873, HIS SON
FRANCOIS-VICTOR DIED.
DEVASTATED,
HUGO CAST ABOUT FOR A WAY
TO RECOVER
HIS FIGHTING SPIRIT.
HE DECIDED TO RETURN TO PARIS,
AND TO POLITICS.
IN 1876, HE WAS ELECTED
SENATOR FOR PARIS.
HE CONSISTENTLY VOTED
WITH THE LEFT-WING,
CONTINUING HIS FIGHT
AGAINST INJUSTICE,
INEQUITY,
AND THE DEATH PENALTY.
HUGO BECOMES THE NATION'S
MORAL TOUCHSTONE.
HE GAVE HOPE
TO A GENERATION THAT WITNESSED
TREMENDOUS UPHEAVAL
AND UNSPEAKABLE VIOLENCE,
AND HE IS RESPECTED
THROUGHOUT THE NATION.
FRANCE TURNED VICTOR HUGO
INTO A LIVING SYMBOL
OF THE REPUBLIC.
ON MAY 11TH, 1883,
HIS LIFELONG LOVER,
JULIETTE DROUET, DIED.
HUGO OUTLIVED HER
FOR ONLY TWO YEARS.
AS PER HIS REQUEST, HE WAS
LAID OUT IN A PAUPER'S COFFIN.
THE COFFIN WAS PLACED
UNDER THE ARC DE TRIOMPHE
AND THEN TRANSPORTED
TO THE PANTHEON,
WHERE HIS EPITAPH READS:
"TO THE GREAT MEN,
THE MOTHERLAND IS GRATEFUL."
TWO MILLION PEOPLE
ATTENDED HIS FUNERAL.
A POEM THAT HUGO HAD
WRITTEN FOR HIS DAUGHTER
CAPTURED
THE FEELINGS OF MANY...
"AT DAWN TOMORROW,
"AS THE COUNTRYSIDE
GROWS BRIGHT I SHALL LEAVE.
"YOU SEE, I KNOW
THAT YOU AWAIT ME.
"I'LL CROSS THE FOREST, AND I'LL
SCALE THE MOUNTAIN'S HEIGHT.
"I CANNOT STAND TO BE
APART FROM YOU LATELY.
"I'LL WALK ALONG, MY EYES
INTENT UPON MY THOUGHTS,
"NOT HEARING ANY SOUND,
"NOR SEEING ANY SIGHT;
"ALONE, UNKNOWN,
MY BACK IS BENT,
"MY HANDS ARE CROSSED, SO SAD,
"SO THAT DAY FOR ME
WILL BE JUST LIKE THE NIGHT.
"I'LL LOOK NOT ON THE FALLEN
EVENING'S GOLDEN TRACE.
"NOR AT THE HARFLEUR-DESTINED
SHIPS' FAR-OFF SEA-SPUME;
"WHEN I GET THERE,
DAUGHTER, ON YOUR TOMB
"I'LL PLACE BOUQUETS OF HOLLY
"AND SOME HEATHER
IN FULL BLOOM."
VICTOR HUGO'S DRAMATIC WORKS
DEFINED ROMANTIC LITERATURE.
HIS NOVELS ARE
TO THIS DAY
CONSIDERED TO BE AMONG
THE BEST HISTORICAL ACCOUNTS
OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY.
HIS POETRY WILL BE READ AND
STUDIED FAR INTO THE FUTURE.
BUT PERHAPS HIS
GREATEST LEGACY IS THAT,
IN AN ERA OF TURMOIL
AND BLOODSHED,
HIS WAS A CLEAR, STRONG VOICE
THAT PROCLAIMED THE FUNDAMENTAL
GOODNESS OF HUMANITY.
[THEME MUSIC PLAYING]
CAPTIONS: BROADCAST TEXT
WWW.BROADCASTTEXT.COM